.\"     # DS - begin display
.de DS
.RS
.nf
.sp
..
.\"     # DE - end display
.de DE
.fi
.RE
.sp
..
.TH dictionary 5 "31 Oct 2005"
.SH NAME
dictionary \- RADIUS dictionary file
.SH DESCRIPTION
The master RADIUS dictionary file resides in
\fI/etc/raddb/dictionary\fP.  It references other \fIdictionary\fP
files located in \fI/usr/local/share/freeradius/\fP.  Each dictionary
file contains a list of RADIUS attributes and values, which the server
uses to map between descriptive names and on-the-wire data.  The names
have no meaning outside of the RADIUS server itself, and are never
exchanged between server and clients.
.PP
That is, editing the dictionaries will have NO EFFECT on anything
other than the server that is reading those files.  Adding new
attributes to the dictionaries will have NO EFFECT on RADIUS clients,
and will not make RADIUS clients magically understand those
attributes.  The dictionaries are solely for local administrator
convenience, and are specific to each version of FreeRADIUS.
.PP
The dictionaries in \fI/usr/local/share\fP SHOULD NOT be edited unless
you know exactly what you are doing.  Changing them will most likely
break your RADIUS deployment.
.PP
If you need to add new attributes, please edit the
\fI/etc/raddb/dictionary\fP file.  It's sole purpose is to contain
site-local defintions that are added by the local administrator.

.SH FORMAT
Every line starting with a hash sign
.RB (' # ')
is treated as comment and ignored.
.PP
Each line of the file can contain one of the following strings
.TP 0.5i
.B ATTRIBUTE name  number  type [vendor|options]
Define a RADIUS attribute name to number mapping.  The \fIname\fP
field can be any non-space text, but is usually taken from
\fIRFC2865\fP, and other related documents.  The \fInumber\fP field is
also taken from the relevant documents, for that name.  The \fItype\fP
field can be one of \fIstring\fP, \fIoctets\fP, \fIipaddr\fP,
\fIinteger\fP, \fIdate\fP, \fIifid\fP, \fIipv6addr\fP,
\fIipv6prefix\fP, or \fIether\fP \fIabinary\fP.  See the RFC's, or the main
\fIdictionary\fP file for a description of the various types.

The last (optional) field of an attribute definition can have either a
vendor name, or options for that attribute.  When a vendor name is
given, the attribute is defined to be a vendor specific attribute.
Alternately, the options may be the a comma-separated list of the
following options:

.TP 0.5i
.DS
	encrypt=[1-3]
.DE
.RS
Mark the attribute as being encrypted with one of three methods.  "1"
means that the attribute is encrypted with the method as defined in
\fIRFC2865\fP for the User-Password attribute.  "2" means that the
password is encrypted with the method as defined in \fIRFC2868\fP for
the Tunnel-Password attribute.  "3" means that the attribute is
encrypted as per Ascend's definitions for the Ascend-Send-Secret attribute.
.RE

.DS
	has_tag
.DE
.RS
Mark the attribute as being permitted to have a tag, as defined in
\fIRFC2868\fP.  The purpose of the tag is to allow grouping of
attributes for tunnelled users.  See \fIRFC2868\fP for more details.
.RE

When the server receives an encoded attribute in a RADIUS packet, it
looks up that attribute by number in the dictionary, and uses the name
found there for printing diagnostic and log messages.

.TP 0.5i
.B VALUE attribute-name value-name number
Define an attribute value name to number mapping, for an attribute of
type \fIinteger\fP.  The \fIattribute-name\fP field MUST be previously
defined by an \fIATTRIBUTE\fP entry.  The \fIvalue-name\fP field can
be any non-space text, but is usually taken from \fIRFC2865\fP, or
other documents..  The \fInumber\fP field is also taken from the
relevant documents, for that name.

When the server receives an encoded value in a RADIUS packet, it looks
up the value of that attribute by number in the dictionary, and uses
the name found there for printing diagnostic and log messages.

.TP 0.5i
.B VENDOR vendor-name number [format=t,l]
Define a Vendor Specific Attribute encapsulation for \fIvendor-name\fP
to \fInumber\fP.  For a list of vendor names and numbers, see
http://www.iana.org/enterprise-numbers.txt.
.PP
The "format=t,l" statement tells the server how many octets to use to
encode/decode the vendor "type" and "length" fields in the attributes.
The default is "format=1,1", which does not have to be specified.  For
USR VSA's, the format is "format=4,0", for Lucent VSA's it's
"format=2,1", and for Starent VSA's it's "format=2,2".
.PP
The supported values for the number of type octets (i.e. the first
digit) are 1, 2, and 4.  The support values for the number of length
octets (i.e. the second digit) are 0, 1, and 2.  Any combination of
those values will work.

.TP 0.5i
.B $INCLUDE filename
Include dictionary entries from the file \fIfilename\fP.  The
\fIfilename\fP is taken as relative to the location of the file which
is asking for the inclusion.
.PP
.SH FILES
.I /etc/raddb/dictionary,
.I /usr/share/freeradius/dictionary.*
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR radiusd (8),
.BR naslist (5),
.BR RFC2865,
.BR RFC2866,
.BR RFC2868
