.TH radiusd.conf 5 "23 Jan 2004" "" "FreeRADIUS configuration file"
.SH NAME
radiusd.conf \- configuration file for the FreeRADIUS server
.SH DESCRIPTION
The \fBradiusd.conf\fP file resides in the radius database directory,
by default \fB/etc/raddb\fP.  It defines the global configuration for
the FreeRADIUS server.

.SH "FILE FORMAT"
The file consists of attribute-value pairs, sections, and comments.

Attribute-value pairs are of the form \fBname = value\fP.

A section begins with a section name, followed on the same line by an
open bracket \fB{\fP.  The section may contain other
sections, or attribute-value pairs.  The section ends with a close
bracket \fB}\fP, on a line by itself.

Any line beginning with a (\fB#\fP) is deemed to be a comment, and is
ignored.  Lines containing only whitespace are also ignored.

The file is line-based.  That is, each newline-terminated line
represents either a comment, a section name, or an attribute-value
pair.  It is not possible to specify multiple items on the same line,
and there are no continuation lines.

The value for a particular attribute may reference a previously
defined attribute by name. The standard shell reference format
\fB${name}\fP is used.  When the variable is in a section or
subsection, it may be referenced as \fB${section.subsection.name}\fP.
Forward references are not allowed.  Relative references are allowed,
via pre-pending the name with one or more of '.'.

The individidual configuration directives are too numerous to list
here, so this manual page only documents the file format.  Please read
the sample configuration file distributed with the server for comments
describing each of the allowed configuration directives.

.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
.DS
	foo = bar

.DE
Sets variable \fBfoo\fP to have text value \fBbar\fP.

.DS
	blogs = ${foo}

.DE
Sets variable \fBblogs\fP to the value of variable \fBfoo\fP from the
current section.  If there is no variable \fBfoo\fP in the current
section, then it looks for that variable in the body of the main
configuration file, e.g. \f${Blogdir}\fP

.DS
	my_section {
.br
		baz = bud
.br
	}

.DE
Defines a section named \fBmy_section\fP, containing variable
\fBbaz\fP.

.DS
	blogs = ${.foo}

.DE
Sets variable \fBblogs\fP to the value of variable \fBfoo\fP,
from the current section.

.DS
	blogs = ${..foo}

.DE
Sets variable \fBblogs\fP to the value of variable \fBfoo\fP, from the
section which contains the current section.

.DS
	blogs = ${modules.detail.detailfile}

.DE
Sets variable \fBblogs\fP to the value of variable \fBdetailfile\fP,
of the \fBdetail\fP module, which is in the \fBmodules\fP section of
the configuration file.

.PP
.SH FILES
/etc/raddb/radiusd.conf
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR radiusd (8),
.BR users (5)
.BR clients (5)

.SH AUTHOR
Alan DeKok <aland@ox.org>
