.TH rlm_pap 5 "3 February 2004" "" "FreeRADIUS Module"
.SH NAME
rlm_pap \- FreeRADIUS Module
.SH DESCRIPTION
The \fIrlm_pap\fP module performs PAP authentication.
.PP
This module performs authentication when the Access-Request contains a
User-Password attribute AND when a "known good" password has been
configured for the user.  In addition, it takes care of decoding the
"known good" password from hex or Base64 encoding to a form it can use
for authentication.
.PP
As a result, as of 1.1.4, the "encryption_scheme" configuration item
SHOULD NOT BE USED, and the rlm_ldap configuration
item "password_header" SHOULD NOT BE USED.  Those items will continue to work
in 1.1.4, and existing systems will work un-changed after upgrading to
1.1.4.  We recommend, though, that sites using multiple instances of
rlm_pap see if they can replace those multiple instances with one instance,
using the new "auto_header" configuration, and remove the "password_header"
configuration from rlm_ldap.
.PP
The configuration item(s):
.IP auto_header
Automatically discover password headers.  Permitted values are "yes"
and "no".  For backwards compatibility, the default is "no".
.IP
The recommended value is "yes".
.IP encryption_scheme
No longer used, and therefore no longer documented.
.PP
When "auto_header" is set to "yes", the module will look in the
configuration list for the User-Password attribute or the new
Password-With-Header attribute.  If found, it will then look at the
string value of those attributes, for one of the following headers:
.PP
.DS
.br	
	{clear}
.br
	{cleartext}
.br
	{crypt}
.br
	{md5}
.br
	{smd5}
.br
	{sha1}
.br
	{ssha1}
.br
	{nt}
.br
	{x-nthash}
.br
	{ns-mta-md5}
.DE
.PP
The text following the header is taken as the "known good" password,
either cleartext, crypted, hashed, or hashed with a salt.  If the text
is hex or Base64 encoded, it will be decoded to obtain the correct
form of the "known good" password.  The User-Password in the
Access-Request will then be crypted, or hashed as appropriate, and
compared to the "known good" password.  If they match, the user is
authenticated, otherwise the module returns reject.
.SH CAVEATS
In order for the "auto_header = yes" functionality to work, the
\fIpap\fP module MUST be listed LAST in the \fIauthorize\fP section of
\fIradiusd.conf\fP.  This lets other modules such as LDAP blindly add
a "known good" password to the configuration items, and the PAP module
will just figure it out.  In most cases, multiple instances of the PAP
module, along with complex logic to determine which one to call when,
can be replaced with one instance of the module, with it listed last
in the \fIauthorize\fP section.
.PP
Note that the \fIns_mta_md5\fP module is no longer necessary, and can
be removed.
.PP
Also, setting "Auth-Type = Local" or "Auth-Type = Crypt-Local" is no
longer necessary.  Any such settings SHOULD BE DELETED.  Simply list
\fIpap\fP LAST in the \fIauthorize\fP section, and the module will
take care of figuring out what to do.  (Have we emphasized that enough?)
.PP
Another reason to list the module last is that it will take care of
normalizing any crypt'd or hashed password retrieved from a database.
So it is now safe to have clear-text passwords as "{clear}...",
because the PAP module will take care of removing the "{clear}" prefix
from the password.  Any other modules that need access to the
cleartext password will
.PP
The module uses a number of new attributes.
.IP Password-With-Header
This attribute should contain a "known good" password, with a header
such as "{crypt}, or "{md5}", etc.  It should be used when the
passwords retrieved from a DB may have different headers.  When
\fIpap\fP is listed in the \fIauthorize\fP section, the module will
examine this attribute, and use it to create one of the other
attributes listed below.  That other attribute is then used for
authentication.
.IP
If the passwords in a DB do not have a header, and are always in one
particular form, then the attributes listed below can be used
directly.  In that case, the PAP module will do hex or Base64 decoding
of the attribute contents, if necessary.  So \fIpap\fP should still be
listed in the \fIauthorize\fP section, because it will enable the
maximum flexibility for the server, and minimize configuration for the
administrator.
.IP Cleartext-Password
This attribute should contain the cleartext for a "known good"
password.  Previously, the User-Password attribute was overloaded to
contain this, both in the FAQ and in databases in many sites.  Any
configuration that sets a cleartext form of the password using
User-Password SHOULD UPDATE to using Cleartext-Password.  Doing so
will simplify a number of debugging issues.
.IP Crypt-Password
This attribute has been around for a while, but is documented here for
completeness.  It contains the crypt'd form of the password.
.IP MD5-Password
This attribute contains the MD5 hashed form of the password.
.IP SMD5-Password
This attribute contains the MD5 hashed form of the password, with a salt.
.IP SHA1-Password
This attribute contains the SHA1 hashed form of the password.
.IP SSHA1-Password
This attribute contains the SHA1 hashed form of the password, with a salt.
.IP NT-Password
This attribute has been around for a while, but is documented here for
completeness.  It contains the NT hash form of the password, as used
by Active Directory and Samba.
.SH SECTIONS
.BR authorize
.BR authenticate
.PP
.SH FILES
.I /etc/raddb/radiusd.conf
.PP
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR radiusd (8),
.BR radiusd.conf (5)
.SH AUTHOR
Alan DeKok <aland@freeradius.org>
