.TH rlm_detail 5 "5 February 2004" "" "FreeRADIUS Module"
.SH NAME
rlm_detail \- FreeRADIUS Module
.SH DESCRIPTION
The \fIrlm_detail\fP module writes radius packets to 'detail' files.
Primarily used for storing accounting information, but can be used
in other sections to write packet details as well.
.PP
The main configuration items to be aware of are:
.IP detailfile
The file name in which to store the radius packet records.  NOTE: this
variable is run through XLAT, and can include FreeRADIUS variables to
create a dynamic filename.
.PP
     %{radacctdir}/%{Client-IP-Address}/detail-%Y-%d
.PP
     This will create one file per day, for each client.  
     This accomplishes 'file rotation' automatically from 
     within the server.
.PP
.IP detailperm
This allows you to configure the file permissions of the detailfile.  
If omitted the default is 0600.
.IP dirperm
This allows you to configure the directory permissions of the
directory where the detail files are created.  The default is 0755.
.IP locking
This options is set to 'yes' or 'no'.  By default it is 'no'.  Set
this to yes to enable file locking, which is useful if you are using
the 'radrelay' program.
.SH CONFIGURATION
.PP
.DS
modules {
  ... stuff here ...
.br
  detail {
.br
    detailfile = %A/%{Client-IP-Address}/detail-%Y%m
.br
    detailperm = 0600
.br
    dirperm = 0755
.br
    locking = no
.br
  }
.br
  ... stuff here ...
.br
}
.DE
.PP
.SH SECTIONS
.BR authorization,
.BR accounting,
.BR pre_proxy,
.BR post_proxy,
.BR post_authentication
.PP
.SH FILES
.I /etc/raddb/radiusd.conf
.PP
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR radiusd (8),
.BR radiusd.conf (5)
.SH AUTHORS
Chris Parker, cparker@segv.org
