.\"     # DS - begin display
.de DS
.RS
.nf
.sp
..
.\"     # DE - end display
.de DE
.fi
.RE
.sp
..
.TH rlm_passwd 5 "20 January 2015" "" "FreeRADIUS Module"
.SH NAME
rlm_passwd \- FreeRADIUS Module
.SH DESCRIPTION
The \fIrlm_passwd\fP module provides authorization via files similar
in format to /etc/passwd.
.PP
This module allows you to retrieve any account information from any
files with passwd-like format (/etc/passwd, /etc/group,
smbpasswd, .htpasswd, etc). Every field of the file may be mapped to
a RADIUS attribute, with one of the fields used as a key.
.PP
The module reads the file when it initializes, and caches the data in
memory.  This makes it very fast, even for files with thousands of
lines. To re-read the file the module will need to be reloaded with
\fIradmin(8)\fP, or the server will need to be sent a SIGHUP, as
dynamic updates are not supported.
.PP
.SH CONFIGURATION
The configuration item(s):
.IP allow_multiple_keys
If set to 'yes', and more than one record in file matches the request,
then the attributes from all records will be used. If set to 'no' (the
default) the module will warn about duplicated records.
.IP delimiter\ =\ ":"
The character to use as a delimiter between fields.  The default is
":"
.IP filename
The path to the file.
.IP format
The format of the fields in the file, given as an example line from
the file, with the content of the fields as the RADIUS attributes
which the fields map to. The fields are separated by the ':' character
in the configuration (no matter what is configured for the 'delimiter'
option).
.IP hash_size
The size of the hash table. A larger value means less probability of a
collision so records will be found faster, at the expense of greater
memory usage. Having a hash_size in the range of 30-100% of the number
of passwd file records is reasonable.
.IP ignore_empty
When set to "yes", the default, empty fields in the input will be
skipped and the RADIUS attribute will not be added.  By setting this
value to "no", all attributes in the format list will always be added,
even if they have no value.
.IP ignore_nislike
If set to 'yes', then all records from the file beginning with the '+'
sign will be ignored.  The default is 'no'.
.PP
.SH FORMAT
The \fIformat\fP option controls how lines are read from the file, and
which fields are mapped to which RADIUS attributes.
.PP
The key field is the field being searched for within the file. It is
normally signified by being preceded with a '*' character, which
indicates that the field has only one key, like the /etc/passwd file.
The key field may instead be preceded with '*,', which indicates that
the field has multiple possible comma-separated keys, such as when
searching the /etc/group file.
.PP
The other fields signify RADIUS attributes. By default they will be
added as a control attribute list.
.PP
To add an attribute to the RADIUS request (as though it had been sent
by the NAS), prefix the attribute name in the "format" string with the
\(aq~' character.
.PP
To add an attribute to the RADIUS reply (to be sent back to the NAS),
prefix the attribute name in the "format" string with the '='
character.
.PP
.SH EXAMPLES
.DS
format = "*User-Name:Crypt-Password:"
.DE
.IP
For a file the looks similar to /etc/passwd. The first field,
User-Name, is the key to look up in the file. When the record is
found, a control attribute, 'Crypt-Password', will be added with the
contents of the second field. (Note this will not work with shadow
passwords.)
.PP
.DS
format = "My-Group:::*,User-Name"
.DE
.IP
Parse a file similar to the /etc/group file.  An entry matches a
request when the name in a User-Name attribute exists in the
comma-separated list of a line in the file.  When an entry matches, 
a "My-Group" attribute will be created and added to the control
items for the request.  The value of that attribute will be taken from
the first field of the matching line in the file.
.IP
The ":::" in the format string means that there are extra two fields
in the line, in between the group name and list of user names.  Those
fields do not map to any RADIUS attribute, and are therefore ignored.
.IP
For this example to work in practice, you will have to add the
My-Group attribute to the dictionary file.  See \fIdictionary(5)\fP
for details on how this may be done.
.PP
.DS
format = "~My-Group:::*,User-Name"
.DE
.IP
Similar to the previous entry, except the My-Group attribute is added
to the request, as though it was sent by the NAS.
.PP
.SH SECTIONS
.BR authorize
.PP
.SH FILES
.I /etc/raddb/mods-available/passwd
.PP
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR radiusd (8),
.BR radiusd.conf (5),
.BR radmin (8),
.BR dictionary (5),
.BR rlm_unix (5)
.SH AUTHOR
Alan DeKok <aland@freeradius.org>, Matthew Newton
<matthew@newtoncomputing.co.uk>.

