.TH rlm_unix 5 "5 February 2004" "" "FreeRADIUS Module"
.SH NAME
rlm_unix \- FreeRADIUS Module
.SH DESCRIPTION
The \fIrlm_unix\fP module allows authentication against the system
password, shadow, and group files.  It also provides FreeRADIUS an
interface into a radwtmp file (used by "radlast") when added to the
accounting section.
.PP
The \fIrlm_unix\fP module provides the functionality for "Auth-Type =
System", rather than "Auth-Type = Unix".  The "System" name is used
for historical reasons.
.PP
The main configuration items to be aware of are:
.IP cache
This is a 'yes' or 'no' option.  If set to yes, FreeRADIUS will read
the system files into memory, rather than perform a system call to
lookup the information.  On *BSD systems, you should set this value to
no.  On other systems, if you have a very large passwd and shadow
files, you can try setting this to yes, which may increase the servers
performance.  The default is no.
.IP cache_reload
This is the number of seconds to wait between refreshing the cached 
files from the system.  It has no effect unless you enable caching.
.IP passwd
The path to the system passwd file.  Usually /etc/passwd.  If
commented out, or not set, the server will retrieve the information
via systemcalls.
.IP shadow
The path to the system shadow file.  Usually /etc/shadow.  This is not
set by default.
.IP group
The path to the system group file.  Usually /etc/group.  This is not
set by default.
.IP radwtmp
The path to the system wtmp file to be used for keeping the database
of online users as read by the 'radlast' program.
.IP usegroup
This is a 'yes' or 'no' option.  If set to 'yes' this allows the Group
attribute to be used as a check item.  Default is 'no'.
.SH CONFIGURATION
.PP
.DS
modules {
  ...
.br
  unix {
.br
    cache = no
.br
    cache_reload = 600
.br
    #passwd = /etc/passwd
.br
    #shadow = /etc/shadow
.br
    #group = /etc/group
.br
    usegroup = no
.br
    radwtmp = ${logdir}/radwtmp
.br
  }
.br
  ...
.br
}
.DE
.PP
.SH SECTIONS
.BR authentication,
.BR accounting
.PP
.SH FILES
.I /etc/raddb/radiusd.conf,
.PP
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR radiusd (8),
.BR radiusd.conf (5),
.BR radlast (1)
.SH AUTHORS
Chris Parker, cparker@segv.org
