= The transaction Statement

.Syntax
[source,unlang]
----
transaction {
    [ statements ]
}
----

The `transaction` statement collects a series of statements into a
single transaction.  If the block returns an error such as `fail`,
`reject`, `invalid`, or `disallow`, any attribute changes which have
been made will be reverted.

[ statements ]:: The `unlang` commands which will be executed.

A `transaction` section should only contain attribute editing which is
done via the xref:unlang/edit.adoc[edit] statements, or conditions
(xref:unlang/edit.adoc[if] / xref:unlang/edit.adoc[else] /
xref:unlang/edit.adoc[elsif]).  It can also contain
xref:unlang/return_codes.adoc[rcodes] such as `fail` or `ok`.

== Caveats

An Unlang `transaction` cannot undo operations on external databases.
For example, any data which was inserted into `sql` during a
`transaction` statement will remain in `sql` even if the Unlang
`transaction` fails.  This is because Unlang transactions are
independent of any database transactions.

The `transaction` keyword sets its own return codes for `fail`,
`invalid`, and `disallow` to be set the the priority `1`, instead of
the default `return`.  This behavior means that a failed `transaction`
will cause the interpreter to proceed to the next instruction, instead
of returning.

.Example

In this example, if the SQL `select` statement fails, then the
`reply.Framed-IP-Address` attribute is _not_ updated, and the
statements inside of the `transaction` section will return `fail`.
The assignment to `reply.Framed-IP-Address` will then be reverted.

[source,unlang]
----
transaction {
    string tmp

    tmp := %sql("SELECT ...")
    reply.Framed-IP-Address := 192.0.2.1

    if !tmp {
        fail
    }

    reply.Filter-Id := tmp
}
----

Note that xref:unlang/edit.adoc[edit] statements do not fail if the
right hand side expression fails.  Instead, you must manually check if
the assignment failed.  The example above does this with an
intermediate variable.

The last entry in a `transaction` section can also be an
xref:unlang/actions.adoc[actions] subsection.  If set, those actions
over-ride any previously set defaults.

== Grouping Edits

The `transaction` keyword can be used to group multiple
xref:unlang/edit.adoc[edit] instructions.  When edit instructions are
grouped, then the edits are done in an atomic transaction.  That is,
either all of the edits succeed, or none of them do.

For now, the main purpose of `transaction` is to group edits.  None of
the modules support transactions.  If a module is used inside of a
transaction, the server will return an error, and will not start.

// Copyright (C) 2023 Network RADIUS SAS.  Licenced under CC-by-NC 4.0.
// This documentation was developed by Network RADIUS SAS.
