= rlm_passwd

Passwd-like files authorization module.

== FAQ

Q: Can I use rlm_passwd to authenticate user against Linux shadow
password file or BSD-style master.passwd? A: Yes, but you need RADIUS
running as root. Hint: use Crypt-Password attribute. You probably don’t
want to use this module with FreeBSD to authenticate against system
file, as it already takes care of caching passwd file entries, but it
may be helpfull to authenticate against alternate file.

Q: Can I use rlm_passwd to authenticate user against SAMBA smbpasswd? A:
Yes, you can. Hint: use LM-Password/NT-Password attribute, set authtype
= MS-CHAP.

Q: Can I use rlm_password to authenticate user against
BLA-BLA-BLApasswd? A: Probably you can, if BLA-BLA-BLA stores password
in some format supported by RADIUS, for example cleartext, NT/LM hashes,
crypt, Netscape MD5 format. You have to set authtype to corresponding
type, for example authtype = NS-MTA-MD5 for Netscape MD5.

Q: Are where are differences between rlm_passwd and rlm_unix? A:
rlm_passwd supports passwd files in any format and may be used, for
example, to parse FreeBSD’s master.passwd or SAMBA smbpasswd files, but
it can’t perform system authentication (for example to authenticate NIS
user, like rlm_unix does). If you need system authentication you need
rlm_unix, if you have to authenticate against files only under BSD you
need rlm_passwd, if you need to authenticate against files only under
Linux, you can choose between rlm_unix and rlm_passwd, probably you will
have nearly same results in performance (I hope :) ).

Q: How can I say passwd to add attribute even if it’s value is empty?

A: set `ignore_empty` to `no` in module configuration.

== Acknowlegements

* ZARAZA, mailto:3APA3A@security.nnov.ru[3APA3A@security.nnov.ru]
* Michael Chernyakhovsky mailto:mike@mgn.ru[mike@mgn.ru]
