.TH RADIUSD 8 "23 June 2004" "" "FreeRADIUS Daemon"
.SH NAME
radiusd - Authentication, Authorization and Accounting server
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B radiusd
.RB [ \-A ]
.RB [ \-S ]
.RB [ \-a
.IR accounting_directory ]
.RB [ \-b ]
.RB [ \-c ]
.RB [ \-d
.IR config_directory ]
.RB [ \-f ]
.RB [ \-i
.IR ip-address ]
.RB [ \-l
.IR log_directory ]
.RB [ \-g
.IR facility ]
.RB [ \-p
.IR port ]
.RB [ \-s ]
.RB [ \-v ]
.RB [ \-x ]
.RB [ \-X ]
.RB [ \-y ]
.RB [ \-z ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
This is the FreeRADIUS implementation of the well known
.B radius
server program.  Even though this program is largely compatible with
\fILivingston's\fP radius version 2.0, it is \fBnot\fP based on any
part of that code.
.PP
FreeRADIUS is a high-performance and highly configurable RADIUS
server.  As a result, it can be difficult to configure in systems with
complex requirements.  Our suggestion is to proceed via the following
steps:
.PP
1) Always run the server in debugging mode (
.B radiusd -X
).  We cannot emphasize this enough.  If you are not running the
server in debugging mode, you \fIwill not\fP be able to see what is
doing, and you \fIwill not\fP be able to correct any problems.
.PP
2) When editing the \fIradiusd.conf\fP file, change as little as
possible, especially in the \fIauthorize{}\fP section.  The ordering
of the modules is critical for the server to be able to
"automatically" figure out how to handle the request.  Changing the
order of the modules ensures that the server will not work.
.PP
3) When testing, start off by configuring a user and password in the
\fIusers\fP file.  So long as the server knows about a user, and has a
clear-text password for that user, \fBalmost all of the authentication
methods will "just work"\fP.
.PP
4) Gradually add more complex configurations to the server, while
testing them as you go.  If you start off by configuring the server in
a complex configuration, you will never be able to debug it.
.PP
5) Ask questions on the mailing list
(freeradius-users@lists.freeradius.org).  When asking questions,
include the output from debugging mode (
.B radiusd -X
).  This information will allow people to help you.  Without it, your
message will get ignored.

.SH BACKGROUND
\fBRADIUS\fP is a protocol spoken between an access server, typically
a device connected to several modems or ISDN lines, and a \fBradius\fP
server. When a user connects to the access server, (s)he is asked for
a loginname and a password. This information is then sent to the \fBradius\fP
server. The server replies with "access denied", or "access OK". In the
latter case login information is sent along, such as the IP address in
the case of a PPP connection.
.PP
The access server also sends login and logout records to the \fBradius\fP
server so accounting can be done. These records are kept for each terminal
server seperately in a file called \fBdetail\fP, and in the \fIwtmp\fP
compatible logfile \fB/var/log/radwtmp\fP.

.SH OPTIONS

.IP \-A
Write a file \fIdetail.auth\fP in addition to the standard \fBdetail\fP file
in the same directory. This file will contain all the authentication-request
records. This can be useful for debugging, but not for normal operation.

This command line option is accepted only for backwards
compatibility.  It no longer does anything.  See the configuration for
the \fIdetail\fP module in \fIradiusd.conf\fP.

.IP \-S
Write the stripped usernames (without prefix or suffix) in the \fBdetail\fP
file instead of the raw record as received from the terminal server.

This command line option is deprecated.  See the \fIlog_stripped_names\fP
configuration item in the \fIradiusd.conf\fP file.

.IP "\-a \fIaccounting directory\fP"
This defaults to \fI/var/log/radacct\fP. If that directory exists,
\fBradiusd\fP will write an ascii accounting record into a detail file for
every login/logout recorded. The location of the detail file is
\fIacct_dir/\fP\fBterminal_server\fP\fI/detail\fP.

This command line option is deprecated.  See the \fIradacctdir\fP
configuration item in the \fIradiusd.conf\fP file.

.IP "\-l \fIlogging directory\fP"
This defaults to \fI/var/log\fP. \fBRadiusd\fP writes a logfile here
called \fIradius.log\fP. It contains informational and error messages,
and optionally a record of every login attempt (for aiding an ISP's
helpdesk). The special arguments \fIstdout\fP and \fIstderr\fP cause
the information to get written to the standard output, or standard
error instead. The special argument \fIsyslog\fP sends the information
with \fBsyslog\fP(3).

This command line option is deprecated.  See the \fIlog_dir\fP
configuration item in the \fIradiusd.conf\fP file.

.IP "\-g \fIfacility\fP"
Specifies the syslog facility to be used with \fB-l syslog\fP. Default is
\fIdaemon\fP. Another reasonable choice would be \fIauthpriv\fP.

.IP "\-d \fIconfig directory\fP"
Defaults to \fI/etc/raddb\fP. \fBRadiusd\fP looks here for its configuration
files such as the \fIdictionary\fP and the \fIusers\fP files.

.IP "\-i \fIip-address\fP"
Defines which IP addres to bind to for sending and receiving packets-
useful for multi-homed hosts.

This command line option is deprecated.  See the \fIbind_address\fP
configuration item in the \fIradiusd.conf\fP file.

.IP \-b
If the \fBradius\fP server binary was compiled with \fIdbm\fP support,
this flag tells it to actually \fIuse\fP the database files instead of the
flat \fIusers\fP file.

This command line option is deprecated, and does not do anything.

.IP \-c
This is still an \fIexperimental\fP feature.
Cache the password, group and shadow files in a hash-table in memory.
This makes the radius process use a bit more memory, but username
lookups in the password file are \fImuch\fP faster.
.IP
After every change in the real password file (user added, password changed)
you need to send a \fBSIGHUP\fP to the radius server to let it re-read
its configuration and the password/group/shadow files !

This command line option is deprecated.  See the \fIcache\fP
configuration item for the \fIunix\fP module in the \fIradiusd.conf\fP
file.

.IP \-f
Do not fork, stay running as a foreground process.

.IP "\-p \fIport\fP"
Normally radiusd listens on the ports specified in \fI/etc/services\fP
(radius and radacct). With this option radiusd listens on the specified
port for authentication requests and on the specified port +1 for
accounting requests.

This command line option is deprecated.  See the \fIport\fP
configuration item in the \fIradiusd.conf\fP file.

.IP \-s
Run in "single server" mode.  The server normally runs with multiple
threads and/or processes, which can lower its response time to
requests.  Some systems have issues with threading, however, so
running in "single server" mode may help to address those issues.  In
single server mode, the server will also not "daemonize"
(auto-background) itself.

.IP \-v
Print server version information and exit.

.IP \-x
Debug mode. In this mode the server will print details of every request
on it's \fBstderr\fP output. Most useful in combination with \fB-s\fP.
You can specify this option 2 times (-x -x or -xx) to get a bit more
debugging output.

.IP \-X
Extended debug mode.  Equivalent to -sfxx, but simpler to explain.

.IP \-y
Write details about every authentication request in the
\fIradius.log\fP file.

This command line option is deprecated.  See the \fIlog_auth\fP
configuration item in the \fIradiusd.conf\fP file.

.IP \-z
Include the password in the \fIradius.log\fP file \fBeven\fP for successful
logins. \fIThis is very insecure!\fP.

This command line option is deprecated.  See the
\fIlog_auth_badpass\fP and the \fIlog_auth_goodpass\fP configuration
items in the \fIradiusd.conf\fP file.

.SH CONFIGURATION
\fBRadiusd\fP uses a number of configuration files. Each file has it's
own manpage describing the format of the file. These files are:
.IP radiusd.conf
The main configuration file, which sets the administrator-controlled
items.
.IP dictionary
This file is usually static. It defines all the possible RADIUS attributes
used in the other configuration files.  You don't have to modify it.
It includes other dictionary files in the same directory.
.IP clients
[ Deprecated ] Contains the IP address and a secret key for every
client that wants to connect to the server.
.IP naslist
Contains an entry for every NAS (Network Access Server) in the network. This
is not the same as a client, especially if you have \fBradius\fP proxy server
in your network. In that case, the proxy server is the client and it sends
requests for different NASes.
.IP
It also contains a abbreviated name for each
terminal server, used to create the directory name where the \fBdetail\fP
file is written, and used for the \fB/var/log/radwtmp\fP file. Finally
it also defines what type of NAS (Cisco, Livingston, Portslave) the NAS is.
.IP hints
Defines certain hints to the radius server based on the users's loginname
or other attributes sent by the access server. It also provides for
mapping user names (such as Pusername -> username). This provides the
functionality that the \fILivingston 2.0\fP server has as "Prefix" and
"Suffix" support in the \fIusers\fP file, but is more general. Ofcourse
the Livingston way of doing things is also supported, and you can even use
both at the same time (within certain limits).
.IP huntgroups
Defines the huntgroups that you have, and makes it possible to restrict
access to certain huntgroups to certain (groups of) users.
.IP users
Here the users are defined. On a typical setup, this file mainly contains
DEFAULT entries to process the different types of logins, based on hints
from the hints file. Authentication is then based on the contents of
the UNIX \fI/etc/passwd\fP file. However it is also possible to define all
users, and their passwords, in this file.
.SH SEE ALSO
radiusd.conf(5), users(5), huntgroups(5), hints(5),
clients(5), dictionary(5).
.SH AUTHOR
The FreeRADIUS Server Project (http://www.freeradius.org)

