.TH RADMIN 8 "10 Sept 2008" "" "FreeRADIUS Server Administration Tool"
.SH NAME
radmin - FreeRADIUS Administration tool
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B radmin
.RB [ \-d
.IR config_directory ]
.RB [ \-e
.IR command ]
.RB [ \-f
.IR socket_file ]
.RB [ \-i
.IR input_file ]
.RB [ \-n
.IR name ]
.RB [ \-o
.IR output_file ]
.RB [ \-q ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
FreeRADIUS Server administration tool that connects to the control
socket of a running server, and gives a command-line interface to it.

At this time, only a few commands are supported.  Please type "help"
at the command prompt for detailed information about the supported
commands.
.SH WARNING
This tool is experimental and should not be used in production
environments.  Changes may be made at any time to the commands
accepted by the server, and/or to the resulting output.

The security protections offered by this command are pretty minimal.
If someone has permission to connect to the server, they can do almost
anything, from stopping the server, to changing it's configuration.

Please exercise caution when using this command!
.SH OPTIONS
The following command-line options are accepted by the program.
.IP "\-d \fIconfig directory\fP"
Defaults to \fI/etc/raddb\fP. \fBradmin\fP looks here for the server
configuration files to find the "listen" section that defines the
control socket filename.
.IP "\-e \fIcommand\fP"
Run \fIcommand\fP and exit.
.IP "\-f \fIsocket_file\fP"
Specify the socket filename directly.  The radiusd.conf file is not read.
.IP "\-i \fIinput_file\fP"
Reads input from the specified file.  If not specified, stdin is used.
This also sets "-q".
.IP "\-n \fImname\fP"
Read \fIraddb/name.conf\fP instead of \fIraddb/radiusd.conf\fP.
.IP "\-o \fIoutput_file\fP"
Write output to the specified file.  If not specified, stdout is used.
This also sets "-q".
.IP \-q
Quiet mode.
.SH COMMANDS
The commands implemented by the command-line interface are almost
completely controlled by the server.  There are a few commands
interpreted locally by radmin:
.IP reconnect
Reconnect to the server.
.IP quit
Exit from radmin.
.IP exit
Exit from radmin.
.PP
The other commands are implemented by the server.  Type "help" at the
prompt for more information.
.SH EXAMPLES
.IP debug\ file\ /var/log/radius/bob.log
Set debug logs to /var/log/radius/bob.log.  There is very little
checking of this filename.  Rogue administrators may be able use this
command to over-write almost any file on the system.  If those
administrators have write access to "radius.conf", they can do the
same thing without radmin, too.
.IP debug\ condition\ '(User-Name\ ==\ "bob")'
Enable debugging output for all requests that match the condition.
Any "unlang" condition is valid here.  The condition is parsed as a
string, so it must be enclosed in single or double quotes.  Strings
enclosed in double-quotes must have back-slashes and the quotation
marks escaped inside of the string.

Only one debug condition can be active at a time.
.IP debug\ condition\ '((User-Name\ ==\ "bob")\ ||\ (Packet-Src-IP-Address\ ==\ 192.0.2.22))'
A more complex condition that enables debugging output for requests
containing User-Name "bob", or requests that originate from source IP
address 192.0.2.22.
.IP debug\ condition
Disable debug conditionals.
.SH SEE ALSO
unlang(5), radiusd.conf(5), raddb/sites-available/control
.SH AUTHOR
Alan DeKok <aland@freeradius.org>
