.TH RADRELAY 8 "09 June 2002" "" "FreeRADIUS Daemon"
.SH NAME
radrelay -- replicate accounting data to another RADIUS server
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B radrelay
.RB [ \-a
.IR accounting_dir ]
.RB [ \-d
.IR radius_dir ]
.RB [ \-f ]
.RB [ \-i
.IR source_ip ]
.RB [ \-n
.IR shortname ]
.RB [ \-r
.IR remote-server[:port] ]
.RB [ \-s
.IR secret ]
.RB [ \-S
.IR secret_file ]
.RB [ \-x ]
\fIdetailfile\fP
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBRadrelay\fP reads a file in the \fIdetail\fP file format,
reconstructs radius packets from it and sends them to a remote
radius server. When end-of-file is reached, the file is truncated.
\fBRadrelay\fP then waits for additional data to be written to
the file, and starts over again.
.PP

.SH OPTIONS

.IP "\-a \fIaccounting_directory\fP"
The base directory to use to read the detail file from.

.IP "\-d \fIradius_directory\fP"
The base radius (raddb) directory, where the config files live.

.IP \-f
Do \fInot\fP fork and run in the background as a daemon.

.IP "\-i \fIsource_ip\fP"
The source IP address to use for sending radius packets.

.IP "\-n \fIshortname\fP"
The radius configuration files (most probably clients.conf), will be
searched for a client section with 'shortname' set to the used argument.
Both the server secret and the remote-server address are obtained in
this way. Do not use the -r, -s or -S parameters in combination with -n.

.IP "\-r \fIremote-server\fP"
The hostname or IP address of the remote server. Optionally a UDP port
can be specified. If no UDP port is specified, it is looked up in
\fI/etc/services\fP. The service name looked for is \fBradacct\fP for
accounting packets. If a service is not found in \fI/etc/services\fP,
1813 is used. The -r parameter can't be used in combination with -n.

.IP "\-s \fIsecret\fP"
Remote server secret.

.IP "\-S \fIsecret_file\fP"
Read remote server secret from file, the file should contain
nothing other then the plain-text secret.

.IP \-x
Enable debug mode, -x will activate radrelay internal debugging, -xx will
also activate librad debugging.

.IP "detailfile"
The detail file to use, this will be appended to the base accounting
directory.

.SH SEE ALSO
radiusd(8),
doc/radrelay.
.SH AUTHOR
Miquel van Smoorenburg, miquels@cistron.nl.
