.TH RLM_SQLIPPOOL_TOOL 8
.SH NAME
rlm_sqlippool_tool - manage SQL IP pools
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B rlm_sqlippool_tool
.RB \-p
.IR pool_name
.RB \-s
.IR range_start
.RB \-e
.IR range_end
.RB \-t
.IR table_name
.RB \-d
.OR dialect
.RB \-f
.IR raddb_dir
.RB \-i
.IR instance
.RB [ \-c
.IR capacity ]
.RB [ \-x
.IR existing_ips_file ]

.B rlm_sqlippool_tool
.RB \-y
.IR pool_defs_yaml_file
.RB \-t
.IR table_name
.RB \-d
.OR dialect
.RB \-f
.IR raddb_dir
.RB \-i
.IR instance
.RB [ \-x
.IR existing_ips_file ]

.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBrlm_sqlippool_tool\fP is a tool to manage IP address in SQL IP
pools as used by FreeRADIUS.  It will either output SQL that can
be used to manipulate the database or will interact directly with
a database to populate an IP pool table.

The format of the SQL output or the commands operated on the database
are based on the default FreeRADIUS ippool schemas.  The fields
populated are \fIpool_name\fP and \fIframedipaddress\fP.  All other
fields are left to be populated with their database defaults.

.SH OPTIONS

.IP \-c\ \fIcapacity\fP
Number of IP addreses to populate the pool with.  Defaults to 65536,
or the maximum number that can be provisioned between the start and
end of the range.
.IP \-d\ \fIdialect\fP
SQL dialect to use in producing the output.
.IP \-e\ \fIrange_end\fP
End IP address in the pool range.  Either IPv4 or IPv6 addresses are
allowed.
.IP \-f\ \fIraddb_dir\fP
Directory containing the FreeRADIUS configuration.  If this option
is specified, then \fBrlm_sqlippool_tool\fP will parse the configuration
and attempt to talk directly to the database server specified in
the FreeRADIUS configuration.
.IP \-i\ \fIinstance\fP
Used in conjuction with -f.  Specifies the name of the sql module
instance to parse in the FreeRADIUS configuration.  Defaults to \fIsql\fP.
.IP \-p\ \fIpool_name\fP
The pool name to populate.
.IP \-s\ \fIrange_start\fP
Start IP address in the pool range.  Either IPv4 or IPv6 addresses
are allowed.
.IP \-t\ \fItable_name\fP
Name of the table in the database to populate.
.IP \-x\ \fIexisting_ips_file\fP
A file containing exsiting IP addresses in the pool.  Use of this allows
for more controlled growth of a sparesly populated pool.
.IP \-y\ \fIpool_defs_yaml_file\fP
A YAML formatted file containing specifications for a number of pools.

.SH EXAMPLES
To produce MySQL formatted SQL for a pool named \fIlocal\fP populated with
addresses from 10.0.0.1 to 10.0.0.199:
.PP
.nf
.RS
$ rlm_sqlippool_tool -p local -s 10.0.0.1 -e 10.0.0.199 \\
    -t dhcpippool -d mysql
.RE
.fi
.PP
To do the same but directly interacting with the SQL module configured
in the FreeRADIUS configuration under \fI/etc/raddb\fP:
.PP
.nf
.RS
$ rlm_sqlippool_tool -p local -s 10.0.0.1 -e 10.0.0.199 \\
    -t dhcpippool -f /etc/raddb
.RE
.fi
.PP
\fBNote:\fP Direct connection to the database is done using Perl DBI.  You
may need to install the appropriate Perl DBD driver to enable this functionality.
.PP
To use a YAML file to specify the pool ranges to be populated, outputting
PostgreSQL formatted SQL:
.PP
.nf
.RS
$ rlm_sqlippool_tool -y pools.yaml -t dhcpippool -d postgresql
.RE
.fi
.PP

.SH YAML FORMAT

A YAML file to populate multiple pools should be formatted like this:
.PP
.nf
.RS
pool_with_a_single_contiguous_range:
  - start:    192.0.2.3
    end:      192.0.2.250

pool_with_a_single_sparse_range:
  - start:    10.10.10.0
    end:      10.10.20.255
    capacity: 200

pool_with_multiple_ranges:
  - start:    10.10.10.1
    end:      10.10.10.253
  - start:    10.10.100.0
    end:      10.10.199.255
    capacity: 1000

v6_pool_with_contiguous_range:
  - start:    '2001:db8:1:2:3:4:5:10'
    end:      '2001:db8:1:2:3:4:5:7f'

v6_pool_with_sparse_range:
  - start:    '2001:db8:1:2::'
    end:      '2001:db8:1:2:ffff:ffff:ffff:ffff'
    capacity: 200
.RE
.ni
.PP

.SH PREREQUISITES

To output formatted SQL, the Perl Template::Toolkit module is required.

Direct connection to databases is done using Perl DBI.  The appropriate
Perl DBD driver needs to be installed to enable this functionality.

.SH SEE ALSO
radiusd.conf(5), raddb/mods-available/sql
.SH AUTHORS
Nick Porter <nick@portercomputing.co.uk>
