.TH VMPSD 8 "23 June 2004" "" "FreeRADIUS VMPS Daemon"
.SH NAME
vmpsd - VLAN Membership Policy Server for Cisco Switches
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B radiusd
.RB [ \-d
.IR config_directory ]
.RB [ \-f ]
.RB [ \-i
.IR ip-address ]
.RB [ \-l
.IR log_directory ]
.RB [ \-g
.IR facility ]
.RB [ \-p
.IR port ]
.RB [ \-s ]
.RB [ \-v ]
.RB [ \-x ]
.RB [ \-X ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
VMPSd is a high-performance and highly configurable VMPS server based
on the existing FreeRADIUS framework. 

.SH BACKGROUND
\fVMPS\fP is used to dynamically update the configuration of ports on
a switch.  When a new device connects to a port, the switch sends a
VMPS query to the server, informing the server of the new devices MAC
address.  The server then responds with the VLAN to which the device
should be assigned.

.SH OPTIONS

.IP "\-l \fIlogging directory\fP"
This defaults to \fI/var/log\fP. \fBvmpsd\fP writes a logfile here
called \fIvmpsd.log\fP. It contains informational and error messages,
and optionally a record of every login attempt (for aiding an ISP's
helpdesk). The special arguments \fIstdout\fP and \fIstderr\fP cause
the information to get written to the standard output, or standard
error instead. The special argument \fIsyslog\fP sends the information
with \fBsyslog\fP(3).

This command line option is deprecated.  See the \fIlog_dir\fP
configuration item in the \fIvmpsd.conf\fP file.

.IP "\-g \fIfacility\fP"
Specifies the syslog facility to be used with \fB-l syslog\fP. Default is
\fIdaemon\fP. Another reasonable choice would be \fIauthpriv\fP.

.IP "\-d \fIconfig directory\fP"
Defaults to \fI/etc/raddb\fP. \fBvmpsd\fP looks here for its configuration
files such as the \fIdictionary\fP and the \fIvmpsd.conf\fP files.

.IP "\-i \fIip-address\fP"
Defines which IP address that the server uses for sending and
receiving packets.

If this command-line option is given, then the "bind_address" and all
"listen{}" entries in \fIvmpsd.conf\fP are ignored.

.IP \-f
Do not fork, stay running as a foreground process.

.IP "\-p \fIport\fP"
Normally vmpsd listens on the ports specified in the configuration
file. When this option is given, it listens on the specified port
for vmps requests.

If this command-line option is given, then the "port" directive in
\fIvmpsd.conf\fP is ignored.

.IP \-s
Run in "single server" mode.  The server normally runs with multiple
threads and/or processes, which can lower its response time to
requests.  Some systems have issues with threading, however, so
running in "single server" mode may help to address those issues.  In
single server mode, the server will also not "daemonize"
(auto-background) itself.

.IP \-v
Print server version information and exit.

.IP \-X
Debugging mode.  Equivalent to -sfxx.

.IP \-x
Finer-grained debug mode. In this mode the server will print details
of every request on it's \fBstdout\fP output. You can specify this
option multiple times (-x -x or -xx) to get more detailed output.

.SH CONFIGURATION
\fBvmpsd\fP uses a number of configuration files. Each file has it's
own manpage describing the format of the file. These files are:
.IP vmpsd.conf
The main configuration file, which sets the administrator-controlled
items.
.SH SEE ALSO
vmpsd.conf(5)
.SH AUTHOR
The FreeRADIUS Server Project (http://www.freeradius.org)
