= DHCPv4

The DHCPv4 protocol assigns IPv4 addresses to machines. FreeRADIUS
implements all of the DHCPv4 standards.

The DHCPv4 functionality include performance, no limits on the size of
IP pools, the ability to use many data sources. FreeRADIUS DHCP server
provides a more flexible solution for DHCP capabilities that include:

== Optimal perfomance surpassing other implementations (ISC or Kea)

FreeRADIUS is multi-threaded by default, and has been for almost two
decades. It can robustly support high input packets rates using many
threads. For example, our benchmarking tests were using thirty-two
threads, because there was no performance benefit in using more
threads. In contrast, ISC DHCP is single threaded, while the more
recent Kea implementation is single threaded by default, and only
supports up to four threads as an “experimental” feature.

The mature multi-threaded capability of FreeRADIUS translates into
higher performance in high load scenarios. While one thread is
accessing the database, another thread can be applying complex local
policies.

== Integration into network seamlessly

Large, complex networks often have a diverse combination of
network-management components that have been specifically chosen for
the unique needs of that organization. For example, device
registration and provisioning systems. Our philosophy is that a DHCP
server should not artificially constrain what those components are or
how they should work. We believe that the network administrator has
made site-local choices for a reason.

FreeRADIUS is designed to be highly modular, which makes it trivial to
“mix and match” different systems. For example, leases could be taken
from SQL, and options from LDAP. Or, options could be assigned from
both PostgreSQL and MySQL, depending on factors such as the network
from which the request originates, or the type of device. This
flexibility allows the server to support almost any work-flow, without
requiring a migration away from existing datastores. It also allows
for fine grained control of policies, which is impossible with Kea.

== Implements query strategies that are optimized for the most common databases

We tested FreeRADIUS with a variety of backend databases and found
that each had different performance characteristics when responding to
queries. For example, our analysis showed that MySQL performed best
using stored procedures, while PostgreSQL was fastest with a discrete
query implementation.

In order to realize the best possible performance gains, we developed
optimized configurations for the most common databases used in DHCP
deployments. This key optimisation work has been replicated across a
number of different database back ends, namely, PostgreSQL, MySQL,
SQLite, Oracle and MS SQL Server.

== Simplifies data workflow

In many environments, device provisioning depends on existing
databases and schemas. If the DHCP server is not customizable, then
the local systems have to be adapted to work with it, instead of the
other way around. Not only is this more effort, but it also becomes
another potential source of errors, and makes the system more brittle
to change.

With FreeRADIUS DHCP, queries are simply text which is stored in
configuration files, and are not hard-coded into the source code. This
choice means that unlike ISC DHCP and Kea, FreeRADIUS has the
flexibility to work with pretty much any schema which can define
device option data or be used to maintain a pool of leases.

== Enables real time monitoring

Good network administrators are proactive about detecting potential
issues before they become actual service-affecting problems. This
means that they want to monitor the DHCP server for certain
conditions, for example, if they are approaching their IP address pool
capacity. They also want to easily get data about usage trends over
time, so that they can accurately plan and project their provisioning
needs.

With FreeRADIUS DHCP, all the leases are pre-inserted into the
database. For the administrator, this means a simple SQL query can
give them a real-time and a historic view of the status of leases and
the address pool. Creating alerts for specific conditions also becomes
a trivial exercise.

In contrast, Kea stores only active addresses in the database with its
pool definitions (start and end IP addresses) configured
elsewhere. When a lease expires, it is eventually removed from the
database. This process makes it very difficult or even impossible to
know how many leases are free, by just looking at the
database. Management software instead has to be aligned with the pool
definitions maintained within configuration files, via some “out of
band” method. Such a limited use of the database makes it more
difficult to use KEA in a production environment.

FreeRADIUS supports:

* xref:raddb/sites-available/dhcp.adoc[dhcp]
* xref:raddb/sites-available/dhcp.relay.adoc[dhcp relay]

== Why use FreeRADIUS DHCP?

* optimized to work with FreeRADIUS

* a simple cost-effective solution - comes with packaage and can use the same hardware

* Flexible configuration and can scale up depending on organization's needs

* includes an xref:raddb/mods-available/isc_dhcp.adoc[ISC DHCP] compatibility module, which allows it to read most common ISC DHCP configuration files.


== Related information

IP adddress pools can be store in
xref:raddb/mods-available/sqlippool.adoc[SQL] or
xref:raddb/mods-available/redis_ippool.adoc[Redist]

See raddb/mods-config/sql/ippool/ for the SQL schemas.
