.TH DHCPCLIENT 1 "19 September 2016" "" "FreeRADIUS Daemon"
.SH NAME
dhcpclient - Send a DHCP request with provided RADIUS attributes and get the output response.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B dhcpclient
.RB [ \-d
.IR raddb_directory ]
.RB [ \-D
.IR dictionary_directory ]
.RB [ \-f
.IR file ]
.RB [ \-h ]
.RB [ \-i
.IR interface ]
.RB [ \-t
.IR timeout ]
.RB [ \-v ]
.RB [ \-x ]
\fIserver[:port] {discover|request|decline|release|inform|auto}\fP
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBdhcpclient\fP is a DHCP test client program. It can send arbitrary DHCP
packets to the FreeRADIUS server running as DHCP server, then shows the reply.
It can be used to test changes you made in the configuration of the radius server,
or it can be used to monitor if a radius server is up.
.PP
\fBdhcpclient\fP reads radius attribute/value pairs from its standard
input, or from a file specified on the command line. It then encodes
these attribute/value pairs using the dictionary, and sends them
to the local/remote server.
.PP

.SH OPTIONS

.IP \-d\ \fIraddb_directory\fP
The directory that contains the user dictionary file. Defaults to
\fI/etc/raddb\fP.
.IP \-D\ \fIdictionary_directory\fP
The directory that contains the main dictionary file. Defaults to
\fI/usr/share/freeradius\fP.
.IP \-f\ \fIfile[:file]\fP
File to read the attribute/value pairs from. If this is not specified,
they are read from stdin.  This option can be specified multiple
times, in which case packets are sent in order by file, and within
each file, by first packet to last packet.  A blank line separates
logical packets within a file.
.IP \-h
Print usage help information.
.IP \-i\ \fIinterface\fP
Select which interface to send/receive at packet level on a raw socket.
.IP \-t\ \fItimeout\fP
Wait \fItimeout\fP seconds before deciding that the NAS has not
responded to a request, and re-sending the packet. This may be a floating
point number, e.g. 2.2.
.IP \-v
Print out program version information.
.IP \-x
Print out debugging information.
.IP server[:port]
The hostname or IP address of the remote server. Optionally a UDP port
can be specified. If no UDP port is specified, it is looked up in
\fI/etc/services\fP. The service name looked for is \fBradacct\fP for
accounting packets, and \fBradius\fP for all other requests. If a
service is not found in \fI/etc/services\fP, 1813 and 1812 are used
respectively.
.IP discover\ |\ request\ |\ decline\ |\ release\ |\ inform\ |\ auto
DHCP options - use the type relevant for testing

.SH SEE ALSO
radiusd(8)
.SH AUTHORS
Alan DeKok <aland@freeradius.org>
