.TH RADCLIENT 1 "24 February 2001" "" "FreeRADIUS Daemon"
.SH NAME
radclient -- send packets to a RADIUS server, show reply
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B radclient
.RB [ \-d
.IR raddb_directory ]
.RB [ \-f
.IR file ]
.RB [ \-i
.IR source_ip ]
.RB [ \-xy ]
\fIserver acct|auth secret\fP
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBRadclient\fP is a radius client program. It can send arbitrary radius
packets to a radius server, then shows the reply. It can be used to
test changes you made in the configuration of the radius server,
or it can be used to monitor if a radius server is up.
.PP
\fBRadclient\fP reads radius attribute/value pairs from it standard
input, or from a file specified on the command line. It then encodes
these attribute/value pairs using the dictionary, and sends them
to the remote server.
.PP
The \fIPassword\fP attribute is automatically encrypted by \fIradclient\fP.

.SH OPTIONS

.IP "\-d \fIraddb_directory\fP"
The directory that contains the RADIUS dictionary files. Defaults to
\fI/etc/raddb\fP.

.IP "\-f \fIfile\fP"
File to read the attribute/value pairs from. If this is not specified,
they are read from stdin.

.IP \-i \fIsource_ip\fP"
The source IP address to use for sending radius packets.

.IP \-x 
Print out extra debugging information.

.IP \-q
Go to quiet mode, and do not print out anything.

.IP "server[:port]"
The hostname or IP address of the remote server. Optionally a UDP port
can be specified. If no UDP port is specified, it is looked up in
\fI/etc/services\fP. The service name looked for is \fBradacct\fP for
accounting packets, and \fBradius\fP for all other requests. If a
service is not found in \fI/etc/services\fP, 1646 and 1645 are used
respectively.

.IP "acct|auth"
Use \fBauth\fP to send an authentication packet, or \fBacct\fP to send
an accounting packet. Instead of \fBauth\fP or \fBacct\fP, you can
also use a decimal code here. For example, code 12 is \fBStatus-Server\fP.

.IP secret
The shared secret for this client. Needs to be defined on the radius
server side too, for the IP address you are sending the radius packets
from.

.SH EXAMPLE

A sample session that queries the remote server for \fIStatus-Server\fP
(not all servers support this.  Cistron-radiusd does since version
1.6.5):
.RS
.sp
.nf
.ne 3

$ echo "User-Name = fnord" | radclient 192.168.1.42 12 s3cr3t
Sending request to server 192.168.1.42, port 1645.
radrecv: Packet from host 192.168.1.42 code=2, id=140, length=54
    Reply-Message = "Cistron Radius up 21 days, 02:05"

.fi
.sp
.RE

.SH SEE ALSO
radiusd(8),
radtest(1).
.SH AUTHOR
Miquel van Smoorenburg, miquels@cistron.nl.
