.TH RADWHO 1 "23 February 2001" "" "FreeRADIUS Daemon"
.SH NAME
radwho -- show online users
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B radwho
.RB [ \-l ]
.RB [ \-h ]
.RB [ \-f ]
.RB [ \-n ]
.RB [ \-s ]
.RB [ \-i ]
.RB [ \-p ]
.RB [ \-c ]
.RB [ \-r ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
The FreeRADIUS server can be configured to maintain an active session
database in a file called \fIradutmp\fP. This utility shows the
content of that session database.
.SH OPTIONS
.IP \-l
Show local shell users too. In this case, \fBradwho\fP reads the
local "session database" aka the systems \fIutmp\fP file as well
and shows the contents of that file before the contents of the
radius "session database" aka the \fIradutmp\fP file, in the
same format.
.IP \-h
Hide shell users. Doesn't show the entries for users that do not
have a SLIP or PPP session.
.IP \-f
Behave as the 'fingerd' daemon - waits for one line of input, then
prints the output with lines \\r\\n terminated.
.IP \-n
Normally radwho looks up the username in the systems password file,
and shows the full username as well. The \fB-n\fP flags prevents this.
.IP \-s
Show full name.
.IP \-i
Shows the session ID instead of the full name.
.IP \-p
Adds an extra column for the port type - I for ISDN, A for Analog.
.IP \-c
Shows caller ID (if available) instead of the full name.
.IP \-r
Outputs all data in \fIraw\fP format - no headers, no formatting,
fields are comma-seperated.

.SH SEE ALSO
radiusd(8).
.SH AUTHOR
Miquel van Smoorenburg, miquels@cistron.nl.

.SH SEE ALSO
radiusd(8),
radiusd.conf(5),
wtmp(5),
last(1).
.SH AUTHOR
Miquel van Smoorenburg, miquels@cistron.nl.
