.TH RADZAP 1 "16 May 2002" "" "FreeRadius Daemon"
.SH NAME
radzap - remove rogue entries from the active sessions database
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B radzap
.RB [ \-d
.IR raddb_directory ]
.RB [ \-r
.IR radius_server ]
.RB [ \-p
.IR accounting_port ]
.RB [ \-v ]
.I nas
.RB [ port ]
.RB [ username ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
The FreeRadius server can be configured to maintain an active session
database in a file called \fIradutmp\fP. Commands like \fBradwho\fP(1)
use this database. Sometimes that database can get out of sync, and
then it might contain rogue entries. \fBradzap\fP can clean up this
database.
.SH OPTIONS
.IP \-d\ \fIraddb_directory\fP
The directory that contains the RADIUS configuration files.
.IP \-r\ \fIradius_server\fP
Host name or IP address of the RADIUS server.
.IP \-p\ \fIaccounting_port\fP
The port to which accounting packets are sent.  See "/etc/services",
port "radacct" for the default on your system (usually 1646 or 1813).
.IP \-v
Verbose. Shows you what it is doing.
.IP nas
Hostname or IP address of the NAS (Network Access Server, sometimes
called "terminal server") of the session you want to remove.
.IP port
Port of the session you want to remove. This is the NAS-Port
radius attribute, it doesn't have anything to do with UDP port
numbers. Must be an integer. \fB-1\fP means "any", and is the
default if this option is not specified.
.IP username
Optional: the username of the session you want to remove.
.SH SEE ALSO
radwho(1),
radiusd(8),
radiusd.conf(5).
.SH AUTHOR
Miquel van Smoorenburg, miquels@cistron.nl., and others.
